3822

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

A Security-Enhanced Pairing-Free Certificateless
Aggregate Signature for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks
Hangcheng Zheng, Min Luo , Yunru Zhang , Cong Peng , and Qi Feng

Abstract—As self-organizing, highly heterogeneous and multiinteractive networks, vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) are
rapidly improving the efficiency of modern traffic. This promising
technology is significant for supporting current intelligent transportation by cooperative data sharing and processing. Considering requirements for secure interactions and the limitation of
resources in VANETs, protecting data authenticity while enhancing
computational efficiency has become the main challenge. A certificateless aggregate signature (CLAS) can not only ensure data
security, but also reduce communication costs, which is suitable
for a resource-constrained environment. However, most existing
CLAS schemes either own serious security vulnerabilities or result in tremendous computational overhead. In this article, we
propose an efficient, privacy-preserving, and pairing-free CLAS
scheme with enhanced security. We prove that it is existentially
unforgeable against adaptive chosen message attacks in the random
oracle model. Performance evaluation illustrates that our proposed
scheme is more appropriate to the VANETs scenario.
Index Terms—Certificateless aggregate signature (CLAS),
digital signature scheme, provably security, vehicular ad-hoc
networks.

I. INTRODUCTION
EHICULAR ad-hoc networks have extensively grabbed
the eyes of both industry and academia. As self-organizing
wireless networks, they possess advantages in intelligent traffic
management, road safety guarantee, and real-time communications. Vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) can provide practical assistance for vehicles in traveling, such as navigation,

V

Manuscript received 25 May 2022; revised 5 September 2022 and 16 October
2022; accepted 6 November 2022. Date of publication 18 November 2022;
date of current version 30 August 2023. The work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172307, in
part by the Special Project on Science and Technology Program of Hubei
Provience under Grant 2021BAA025, Grant 2020AEA013, in part by and the
Shandong Provincial Key Research and Development Program under Grant
2021CXGC010107, Grant 2020CXGC010107. (Corresponding authors: Min
Luo; Yunru Zhang.)
Hangcheng Zheng is with the Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information
Security and Trusted Computing Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with
the Shanghai Technology Innovation Centre of Distributed Privacy-Preserving
Artificial Intelligence, Matrix Elements Technologies, Shanghai 201204, China
(e-mail: whuzhc@whu.edn.cn).
Min Luo is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Computer Networks, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong
Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250014, China (e-mail: mluo@whu.edu.cn).
Yunru Zhang, Cong Peng, and Qi Feng are with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail:
yunruzhang@qq.com; cpeng@whu.edu.cn; fengqi.whu@whu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSYST.2022.3220869

Fig. 1.

VANETs system model.

video streams, and radio reception. Besides, by monitoring
real-time vehicle traffic streams and recording road conditions,
they can help drivers handle road emergencies as fast as possible. Equipped with advanced onboard embedded sensors and
integrating mobile communication technology, VANETs make
a huge difference in the way of transportation. It can realize
the information exchange and data sharing between vehicles
and vehicles, vehicles and roads, vehicles and remote servers,
bring huge convenience to public transport and help to build
an intelligent transportation modern model. As a result, all the
above benefits make VANETs a booming technology and attract
enormous attention from intelligent transportation.
As Fig. 1, a typical VANETs system is consist of five components: key generation center (KGC), trusted authority (TA),
application backend (AB), road-side unit (RSU), and on-board
unit (OBU). There are generally two kinds of communication in
VANETs: vehicle to vehicle (V2V) and vehicle to infrastructure
(V2I) [1]. The latter implies the message interaction between
vehicles and base station nodes like RSU. Meanwhile the former
indicates the data sharing among vehicles. The real-time traffic
information exchange between vehicles and RSUs is mainly

1937-9234 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

based on dedicated short range communications (DSRC), and
the network communication between vehicles and remote cloud
application servers is based on secure socket layer (SSL) protocol. Apparently, a tremendous amount of data (such as driving
data and application-related data) flows and transfers in VANETs
with the purpose of data sharing and safe driving. However, data
transmission over insecure network communication channels
poses a great threat to VANETS. The attacker can compromise
the confidentiality and integrity of the messages by means of
information interception, tampering, and forgery, so as to directly affect the normal operation of vehicles and even serious
to control them. So, during data sharing process in VANETs,
it is undisputed that data integrity and authenticity should be
safeguarded.
Based on such concerns, one of the fundamental cryptographic primitives—digital signature, has been widely applied
to protect data authenticity and integrity. However, the transmission of abundant signature messages would bring about considerable computation and communication costs in VANETs,
which could be a huge burden to a resource-limited environment.
Therefore, it is not practical to use the original digital signature technology directly in VANETs. Besides, cryptographic
schemes based on traditional public-key infrastructure (PKI)
hold the disadvantage of certificate management. Although
utilizing an identity-based cryptosystem (IBC) can solve this
defect, it also leads to the key escrow problem. As a result, both
of them are inadaptable to apply in VANETs.
In 2003, Al-Riyami et al. [2] put forward certificateless cryptography (CLC). Through generating private keys from two
separated parts, CLC resolves immanent problems of PKI-based
and IBC-based cryptosystems. Additionally, Boneh et al. [3]
raised the definition of aggregate signature in 2003. It is an
effective technique that maps multiple signatures into one short
signature, which could reduces the communication overhead
significantly. Taking the aforementioned methodology into consideration, Castro et al. [4] first combined CLC with aggregate
signature and then proposed certificateless aggregate signature
(CLAS). Due to its high efficiency and security, CLAS is well
suited to the VANETs environment.
In addition, we also need to protect the privacy of vehicles
in VANETs. Vehicle private information in VANETs includes
traffic track, location, direction, etc. Through the analysis and
derivation of these private information, malicious attackers can
infer the vehicle’s basic information, including the real indentity.
So, instead of the real indentity, the vehicle can use a short-term
pseudonym anonymous identity to protect the communication
privacy in a certain period of time. Except for the trusted third
party, no one could extract the real identity of the vehicle through
the pseudonym identity. In short, such a conditional privacy
perserving mechanism is necessary for VANETs.
Although lots of privacy perserving CLAS schemes were
constructed for sake of applying in VANETs. Yet, some of
these schemes had fatal security problems and could not resist
various threats from different adversaries. Neither could they
meet the performance requirements of VANETs. Most recently,
Han et al. [5] designed a CLAS scheme in VANETs to safeguard
the integrity and authenticity of data. They introduced that

3823

their scheme is secure enough against two kinds of malicious
adversaries. In this article, we will show that there are some
defects in their scheme and therefore, we propose our conditional privacy-preserving CLAS scheme with high-efficiency
and enhanced-security for VANETs.
A. Motivations and Contributions
There are still numerous problems with respect to security
and efficiency in CLAS schemes. Some of the schemes use
time-consuming math operations like map-to-point hash function and bilinear pairing, which greatly increases the computational cost of signature generation and signature verification. In
addition, some schemes are unable to defend against multiple
attacks performed by malicious attackers (public-key replacement, signature forgery, etc) and lack a theoretical protocol
security analysis. Besides, certificate management from PKI
and key escrow problem from IBC are also issues need to be
addressed. To overcome the aforementioned disadvantages, we
give an efficient, security-enhanced, and pairing-free CLAS for
VANETs along with its detailed security proof.
In general, the main contributions of this article can be summarized as follows.
1) We review the scheme proposed by Han et al. [5], and
give a concrete construction of the attacking instance to
display its security flaws. We show that a malicious node
can recover the master private key of KGC through the
interaction with it.
2) We propose an improved and security-enhanced CLAS
scheme that fixes the defects of the aforementioned
scheme and can protect the data integrity and authenticity
in VANETs more effectively.
3) Through a rigorous security reduction, we illustrate that
our scheme is existentially unforgeable against both types
of adversary in the random oracle model. Our scheme
can also satisfy the different security requirements in
VANETs, such as conditional anonymity, message integrity, and mutual authentication, so could it be resistant
to different attacks (replay attack, man-in-the-middle attack, signature forgery attack, etc).
4) We demonstrate that our scheme is better suited for
VANETs scenarios by comparing the computation cost
and security characteristic with original scheme (see [5])
and other existing schemes (see [6], [7], [8], [9]).
B. Organization
The remaining part of this article is arranged as below. At
first, we will briefly enumerate the literature on CLAS schemes
in Section II, and recommend background knowledge in Section III. Next, we introduce the security model of CLAS scheme
and the system model of VANETs in Section IV. Brief introduction of Han et al.’s scheme [5] and detailed vulnerability are
presented in Section V. Our improved scheme and corresponding detailed security proof process are given in Section VI. After
that, in Section VII, we implement our proposed scheme and
make a performance evaluation and a comparison. Section VIII
concludes this article.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3824

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

II. RELATED WORK
The basic conception of aggregate signature was first proposed in [3] by Boneh et al. in 2003. After the notion was
introduced, numerous state-of-the-art cryptographic schemes
were raised. Generally speaking, traditional PKI-based schemes
(see [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]) bind the public key with a user’s
identity through a certificate issued by the certificate authority
(CA). This may bring about vast overhead caused by the management of certificates when the amount of users increases. To
solve this problem, scholars and academicians began to consider
schemes based on identity. Gentry et al. [15] put forward the
first identity-based aggregate signature scheme. After this work,
abundant identity-based schemes (see [16], [17], [18], [19]) were
proposed. However, the private key is completely generated by
KGC in an identity-based cryptosystem, which may lead to
serious key escrow problems.
Considering the above problems of schemes based on PKI
and IBC cryptosystem, the notion of certificateless public-key
cryptography [2] (CL-PKC) was raised. In CL-PKC, the private
key is made up of two components: a secret value chosen by the
user as well as a partial private key produced by KGC. It is able
to eliminate the certificate distribution and key escrow problem
in PKC and IBC cryptosystem to a certain extent.
After the first CLAS scheme [4] was presented in 2007,
a series of CLAS schemes were proposed. Xiong et al. [20]
designed a certificateless signature and raised a CLAS scheme.
Unfortunately, He et al. [21] claimed that their construction is
not provably secure toward the Type II adversary by a concrete analysis. Chen et al. [22] analyzed the security flaws
of Xiong et al. [20] and Liu et al. [23]. Next, they proposed
a CLAS scheme alleged to resist both types of adversaries.
However, Zhang et al. [24] showed that the scheme in [22]
is also not secure—KGC with malicious purpose was able to
forge a valid signature. Considering the scenario of healthcare
wireless medical sensor network (HWMSN), Kumar et al. [6]
designed a so-called effective CLAS scheme based on computationally hard Diffie-Hellman assumption. Nevertheless, it
was still demonstrated to be insecure to signature forgery attack
by Wu et al. [7]. Last but not least, all of these proposed
schemes were constructed through expensive bilinear pairing
computation over elliptic curves. Given that calculating bilinear
pairing may result in tremendous overhead, we believe it is not
suitable for a resource-limited scenario like Internet of Things
(IoT) and VANETs.
Due to this reason, the efficiency of scheme has to be further
polished to adapt to resource-constrained environments. He
et al. [25] proposed the first pairing-free CLS scheme. By merely
using operations on an elliptic curve, their scheme immensely
reduced the calculation cost and improved efficiency. Gayathri
et al. [8] raised a CLAS scheme in HWMSN without bilinear
pairing. Unfortunately, it was found by Liu et al. [9] that Gayathri
et al.’s scheme is vulnerable to two types of adversary. Besides,
although Liu et al. [9] put forward an improved scheme that was
secure in the random oracle model, Zhan et al. [26] discovered
their scheme still existed a security flaw that may be exploited
by a malicious KGC. Recently in 2021, Han et al. [5] raised an

TABLE I
DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME NOTATION

efficient pairing-free CLAS scheme, aiming at further improving
security and reducing communication costs in VANETs. However, this scheme had serious security vulnerability, which we
will explain subsequently.
III. PRELIMINARIES
We start by reviewing some related preliminaries in cryptography. Some notation is given in Table I.
A. Cryptography of Elliptic Curve
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) is a public key cryptosystem constructed from elliptic curves over a finite field. With
a shorter key length, it can achieve a similar security level
of RSA cryptography system. We denote O as the infinity
point and the elliptic curve cyclic group G can be defined as
G = {(x, y) : y 2 = x3 + ax + ba} ∪ {O}. Set n be the order
of G, then we can define P as one generator of G if and only if
nP = O and tP = O for any t|n.
There are two basic operations in elliptic curve cyclic group
G as follows.
1) Point addition: Assume two random points Q1 and Q2 of
elliptic curve cyclic group, L is the line connecting point
Q1 and Q2 (tangent line of elliptic curve E if Q1 = Q2 ).
It can be defined that Q1 + Q2 = Q3 , where −Q3 is the
intersection point of line L and elliptic curve E.
2) Scalar multiplication: Scalar multiplication in elliptic
curve cyclic group G is given as tP = P + P + P +
· · · + P (t times), t ∈ Zn∗ .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

Definition 1: Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem
(ECDLP): On elliptic curve E/Fp , given that G is an additive cyclic group with order n. P is the generator of G and
Q ∈ G. The probability of calculating x, x ∈ Zn∗ , which satisfies
Q = xP in polynomial time is negligible.

IV. SECURITY AND SYSTEM MODEL
A. Security Model
In general, the security of a CLAS scheme can be evaluated
by two adversary models as follows.
1) Type I: An external user that can replace the public key of
any entity, but cannot access the master private key.
2) Type II: A malicious KGC that possesses the secret master
private key, however, it cannot replace the legal public key
of a certain entity.
As the security model raised by Huang et al. [27], the levels
of adversary can be sorted into normal, strong, and super. In
their definition, the detailed difference is as follows:
1) N ormal: It can only fetch a signature from a legal user,
otherwise it must know the corresponding partial private
key and secret value.
2) Strong: It can access the signature. Meanwhile, it’s able
to replace the public key with a random number, if and
only if he owns and keeps the corresponding secret value.
3) Super: It can not only get a signature, but also replace the
public key with a random value even though it does not
possess the corresponding secret value.
In this article, we concentrate on the security robustness of the
two types of adversary models with the super level. A super
level adversary A can initiate some oracle queries to challenger
C as follows.
1) UserCreate(IDi ): This oracle generates all parameters of
a certain user identity and records them in the list L. On
inputting an identity IDi , C generates secret value xi ,
partial private key di , and public key Xi respectively, by
executing corresponding algorithms. After that it stores
{IDi , xi , di , Xi } into list L as an entry.
2) PartialPrivateKeyExtract(IDi ): This oracle returns a certain user’s partial private key for the adversary A’s query.
3) PublicKeyReplace(IDi , xi , Xi ): This oracle responds to
adversary A’s query request for replacing a certain
user’s public key. C updates the corresponding entry
{IDi , xi , di , Xi } to {IDi , xi , di , Xi }. Note that xi can
be set to ⊥ in list L.
4) SecretValueExtract(IDi ): This oracle returns a certain
user’s secret value for the adversary A’s query request.
5) Sign(IDi , Mi ): This oracle reacts to adversary A’s query
request for a valid signature σ. After inputting a message
Mi , an indentity IDi , chanllenger C generates a valid signature σ based on the information recorded in corresponding list such that T rue ← V erif y(IDi , Xi , Mi , σ).
Security model of our scheme can be formalized by two
interactive games executed by challenger C and adversary AI /
AII :

3825

Game 1: Game 1 is executed between a super-level Type I
adversary AI and a challenger C. This game is carried out in
three phases:
r P hase1 (Setup): On inputting security parameter λ, C
performs Set U p algorithm, generates the master private
key a and params. Next, C sets params public to AI
meanwhile keeps a secretly.
r P hase2 (Query): AI adaptively issues some queries to
UserCreate, PartialPrivateKeyExtract, PublicKeyReplace,
SecretValueExtract and Sign in polynomial time.
r P hase3 (F orge): After all the above queries in P hase2
are completed, AI outputs an aggregate signature σ ∗ together with user identity set {IDi }ni=1 , corresponding
public key set {Xi }ni=1 and signed message set {Mi }ni=1 .
We believe that if and only if the following are achieved can
AI win the above game.
1) Signature σ ∗ is valid, which means T rue ←
AggregateV erif y({IDi }ni=1 , {Xi }ni=1 , {Mi }ni=1 , σ ∗ ).
2) Without loss of generality, there is at least one user with
identity ID who has not ever invoked a query to PartialPrivateKeyExtract or accessed Sign with {ID , M  }.
Game 2: Game 2 is executed between a super-level Type II
adversary AII and a challenger C. This game is carried out in
three following phases.
r P hase1 (Setup): On inputting security parameter λ, C
performs Set U p algorithm to generate params and a
master private key a. Next, C sets params and a public
to AII .
r P hase2 (Query): AII adaptively issues some queries to
UserCreate, SecretValueExtract and Sign in polynomial
time.
r P hase3 (F orge): After all the above queries in P hase2
are completed, AII outputs an aggregate signature σ ∗
together with user identity set {IDi }ni=1 , the corresponding
public key set {Xi }ni=1 and signed message set {Mi }ni=1 .
We believe that if and only if the following are achieved can
AII win the above game:
1) Signature σ ∗ is valid, which means T rue ←
AggregateV erif y({IDi }ni=1 , {Xi }ni=1 , {Mi }ni=1 , σ ∗ ).
2) Without loss of generality, there is at least one user with
identity ID hasn’t ever issued a query to SecretValueExtract, and nor did it access the Sign with {ID , M  }.
Definition 2: A CLAS scheme is existentially unforgeable
under adaptive chosen message attack (EUF-CMA) on the condition that, for any polynomially bounded AI or AII , success
probability of the above two games is negligible.
B. Security and Privacy Requirements
Due to the insecure communication channels in VANETs, a
CLAS scheme should meet the following security and privacy
requirements.
1) Mutual authentication: In the communication process,
proposed scheme should ensure that the vehicle and the
RSU can achieve mutual identity authentication with each
other during the digital signature phase.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3826

2) Conditional anonymity: The real identity information of a
vehicle should be hidden during communication, and can
only be recovered by a specific entity when necessary.
3) Message integrity: During the interaction, RSU is able to
verify the messages to ensure that the data sent by vehicles
is not modified by other entities.
4) Unlinkability: No one can associate two signatures signed
by the same user.
In addition, considering the real scenario of VANETs, a secure
CLAS scheme should ensure to resist against the following
attacks.
1) Man-in-the-middle attack: A malicious attacker establishes communication with both participants and controls
the entire session.
2) Replay attack: A malicious attacker intercepts a message
sent during the past period of time in the communication
channel and repeats it to achieve illegal purposes.
3) Denial of service attack: An attacker boardcasts a large
number of malicious messages among VANETs in a short
time to affect the normal service of other vehicles.
4) Impersonation attack: A malicious adversary disguises
itself as a legitimate user by modifying authentication data.
And then threatens the security of VANETs by spreading
false road news and so on.
5) Signature forgery attack: A malicious attacker can forge
a legitimate signature without valid private key to bypass
the verification phase.
C. System Model
The architecture of the VANETs system is primarily comprised of five parties as described in Fig. 1. Each vehicle owns
the real identity, a number of pseudonym anonymous indentities,
and corresponding public/private key pairs. And it is necessary
for them to sign before sending messages into the network.
Among all the five parts of VANETs, the detailed demonstration
is given as follows.
1) TA is an authentic third party for managing the temporary
identity and providing registration service. Besides, it is
the only entity that can trace the true identity of a vehicle
using the master private key. It is assumed that the TA will
never be corrupted.
2) KGC is mainly responsible for generating system parameters in VANETs and participating in the process of key
generation. It is in charge of producing the partial private
key and transmitting it to each vehicle.
3) OBU is a resource-constrained device with wireless communication capabilities. It can interact with other vehicle
nodes and roadside nodes intelligently.
4) RSU is a fixed base station for communication beside
the road that has more computation or storage resources.
RSU can act as an active node to receive traffic data from
vehicles within its range, verifies these messages to ensure
their integrity and aggregates the individual signatures to
minimize the number of signed messages.
5) AB mainly supplies vehicles with various kinds of data services about navigation, entertainment, traffic information

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

or weather, etc. Concretely, it seizes data from RSUs or
other sources through communication channel, conducts
data analysis and returns the data processing result to
vehicles.
V. SECURITY ANALYSIS OF HAN ET AL.’S CLAS SCHEME
We review the aggregate signature scheme raised by Han
et al. [5] in summary, then analyze the security shortcomings
of their scheme and present an attack method in detail.
A. Review of Han et al.’s CLAS Scheme
1) System Initialization
a) Sets a group G with order q and a generator P ∈ G on
curve E.
b) KGC selects a ∈ Zq∗ randomly and calculates Kpub =
aP .
c) TA selects b ∈ Zq∗ randomly and calculates Tpub = bP .
d) Chooses three collision-resistant hash functions
h1,2,3 : {0, 1}∗ → Zq . then params can be published
as {P, q, E, G, h1 , h2 , h3 , Kpub , Tpub }.
2) Pseudonym Identity Generation the algorithm takes the
real identity information of vehicle node Vi as input,
outputs Vi ’s pseudonym identity:
a) Vi selects yi ∈ Zq∗ randomly and calculates PIDi,1 =
yi P, Yi = yi Tpub ⊕ RIDi , sends {PIDi,1 , Yi } to TA.
b) TA receives {PIDi,1 , Yi } and calculates RIDi = Yi ⊕
bPIDi,1 , PIDi,2 = RIDi ⊕ h1 (bPIDi,1 ΔTi ). Note
ΔTi is pseudonym identity’s validity period.
c) Finally, TA sets PIDi = {PIDi,1 , PIDi,2 , ΔTi } and
sends it toward KGC as pseudonym identity.
3) Vehicle Key Generation Vi randomly selects xi ∈ Zq∗ and
computes Xi = xi P .
4) Partial Private Key Extract KGC executes this algorithm.
By performing following process it outputs partial private
key of Vi :
a) KGC first calculates h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi ) and Wi =
h2i Kpub .
b) Then sets di = ah2i as the partial private key.
c) KGC sends {PIDi , di } to Vi , and Vi regards {xi , di }
as its private key.
5) Sign this algorithm is performed by vehicle Vi , which
takes {PIDi , Ti , Mi , xi , di } as input and outputs σi as
signature. The detailed process is as follows.
a) Vi selects ri ∈ Zq∗ at random and sets Ui = ri P .
b) Vi calculates h3i = h3 (Mi PIDi Xi Ui Ti ) and
si = di + xi h3i .
c) Sets σi = (Ui , si ).
d) Vi transmits {PIDi , Xi , Mi , Ti , σi } to the receiver.
6) Verify this algorithm takes {PIDi , Xi , Mi , Ti , σi } as input,
outputs verification result:
a) Verifier first checks if time Ti is in valid interval.
b) Verifier computes h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi ) and h3i =
h3 (Mi PIDi Xi Ui Ti ).
c) Checks whether si P = h2i Kpub + Xi h3i is established.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

7)

Aggregate this algorithm is run by an aggregator RSU, taking {PIDi , Xi , Mi , Ti , σi }, i ∈ (1, 2, . . . , n)
as input. And it calculates s = Σni=1 si , outputs σ =
(U1 , U2 , U3 , . . . , Un , s).
8) Aggregate Verify this algorithm inputs the aggregate signature σ, and outputs the signature verification result:
a) Verifier calculates h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi ), h3i =
Wi =
h3 (Mi PIDi Xi Ui Ti ), i ∈ (1, 2, . . . , n),
h2i Kpub .
b) 
Verifier finally checks whether sP = Σni=1 Wi +
n
i=1 Xi h3i is established or not.

B. Analysis of Han et al.’s Scheme
For a malicious node Vm with public key Xm and pseudonym
identity PIDm , it can recover master private key a. Through the
partial private key obtained during step 4, Vm performs as the
following steps:
1) Vm receives partial private key dm from KGC: dm =
ah2 m .
2) Vm then calculate h2 m = h2 (PIDm , Xm ) ∈ Zq∗ , Tm =
h−1
2 m mod q.
3) Vm finally gets a by computing a = Tm ∗ dm mod q.
In conclusion, for the above attacks carried by the malicious
node Vm in VANETs, Han et al.’s scheme cannot ensure the
privacy of the master private key. It will lead to the explosion
of a. As a result, it is impossible to maintain their illustrated
security level.
VI. OUR PROPOSED PROVABLY-SECURE CLAS SCHEME
In this part, for sake of solving the security concerns of the
previous scheme, we first propose an improved provably secure
CLAS scheme. We then introduce rigorous proof that reduces
the security of our raised scheme to the ECDLP hard assumption.
A. Our improved CLAS scheme
1) System Initialization the algorithm is carried by KGC and
TA, specificially as:
a) Selects a group G with order q and a generator P ∈ G
on curve E.
b) KGC selects a ∈ Zq∗ at random as the master private
key, then master public key can be regarded as Kpub =
aP .
c) TA selects a number b ∈ Zq∗ randomly as master private
key, corresponding public key can be calculated as
Tpub = bP .
d) Chooses three collision-resistant hash functions:
h1,2,3 : {0, 1}∗ → Zq and publishes params =
{P, q, E, G, h1 , h2 , h3 , Kpub , Tpub }.
2) PID Generation  detailed process of the algorithm is as
follows:
a) Vi sets a number yi ∈ Zq∗ at random, computes
PIDi,1 = yi P, Yi = yi Tpub ⊕ RIDi .
b) TA receives above data and calculates real
= Yi ⊕ bPIDi,1 ,
PIDi,2
=
identity
RIDi
RIDi ⊕ h1 (bPIDi,1 ΔTi ).

3827

c) Finally, TA generates the pseudonym identity PIDi =
{PIDi,1 , PIDi,2 , ΔTi }.
3) Partial Private Key Extract  KGC performs the algorithm,
detailed process can be given as following:
a) KGC first selects ri ∈ Zq∗ and computes Ri = ri P .
b) Calculates h1i = h1 (PIDi Ri Kpub ).
c) Computes di = ri + ah1i as partial private key.
d) Transmits {PIDi , di , Ri } to Vi through secure channel.
4) Vehicle Key Generation  the algorithm is executed by Vi ,
detailed process is given as follows.
a) Vi receives the message in step 3, selects xi ∈ Zq∗
randomly and calculates Xi = xi P .
b) Sets SKi = {xi , di } as its private key and the public
key can be presented as P Ki = {Xi , Ri }.
5) Sign detailed process of the algorithm can be introduced
as follows.
a) Selects ui ∈ Zq∗ randomly and sets Ui = ui P .
b) Vi calculates h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi Kpub Ri Ti ), h3i =
h3 (PIDi Mi P Ki Ui Ti ).
c) Vi calculates si = ui + di h2i + xi h3i , and then sets
σi = (Ui , si ) as the signature.
At last, Vi sends {PIDi , P Ki , Mi , Ti , σi } to receiver.
6) Verify  the algorithm is run by receivers of message. The
detailed process can be given as follows.
a) When receiving a tuple {PIDi , P Ki , Mi , Ti , σi }, the
verifier first checks if time Ti is in valid interval.
b) Verifier then calculates h1i = h1 (PIDi Ri Kpub ),
h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi Kpub Ri Ti ), h3i = h3 (PIDi
Mi P Ki Ui Ti ).
c) Finally
checks
whether
si P = Ui + (Ri +
h1i Kpub )h2i + Xi h3i is established or not.
7) Aggregate  the algorithm is executed by RSU . The
detailed process is as follows:
1) Aggregator RSU calculates s = Σni=1 si and outputs
σ = (U1 , U2 , U3 , . . . , Un , s).
8) Aggregate Verify  the algorithm inputs the aggregate signature σ, outputs signature verification result. The detailed
process is as follows, where i ∈ (1, 2, . . . , n):
a) Verifier calculates the following, respectively:
U=

n


Ui

i=1

h1i = h1 (PIDi Ri Kpub )
h2i = h2 (PIDi Xi Kpub Ri Ti )
h3i = h3 (PIDi Mi P Ki Ui Ti )
n
b) Verifier finally checks
n whether sP = U + i=1 (Ri +
h1i Kpub )h2i + i=1 Xi h3i is established or not.
B. Proof of Correctness
1) The correctness of Verify algorithm can be deduced as
follows.
si P = (ui + di h2i + xi h3i ) P
= Ui + di h2i P + h3i xi P

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3828

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

= Ui + (ri + ah1i )h2i P + h3i Xi
= Ui + (ri P + h1i aP )h2i + h3i Xi
= Ui + (Ri + h1i Kpub )h2i + h3i Xi .
2) Let s = Σni=1 si , U = Σni=1 Ui , the correctness of Aggregate Verify algorithm can be given as follows.

 n

(ui + di h2i + xi h3i ) P
sP =
i=1

=

n


ui P +

i=1

=

n


n


di h2i P +

i=1

Ui +

i=1

=U+

n

i=1

n


n


h3i xi P

i=1
n


h3i Xi

i=1

(ri + ah1i )h2i P +

i=1

=U+

di h2i P +

n


n


h3i Xi

i=1

(Ri + h1i Kpub )h2i +

i=1

n


h3i Xi .

i=1

C. Formal Security Analysis
According to our demonstrated security model, we propose
formal security proof in this section. Based on the complexity
of ECDLP, we aim to indicate that our scheme is existentially
unforgeable against both super types of adversary.
Lemma 1: Under the random oracle model, on the condition
that a Type I PPT adversary AI can forge a valid aggregate
signature successfully with a non-negligible probability through
the interaction with challenger CI , then we believe that CI can
use the adversary AI ’s capability to solve an ECDLP instance
with a non-negligible probability.
Proof: Considering AI and CI interact with each other as
Game 1 described previously. Assume that CI maintains an
ECDLP instance: given P ∈ G, Q = aP , the purpose of CI is
calculating a as an answer of ECDLP by taking advantage of AI .
For this purpose, CI selects an anonymous challenge identity
PID∗i and carries out as indicated below:
Setup: CI initializes params = {P, q, E, G, h1 , h2 , h3 ,
Kpub } and sets Kpub = Q = aP . Next, CI sends params to
AI and keeps a secretly.
Query: CI simulates H1 , H2 , and H3 as hash oracles. Besides,
lists Lh1 , Lh2 , Lh3 are maintained to record the queries of hash
oracles. In addition, AI ’s queries to secret value, user public
key and partial private key are kept in list Lsv , Lpk , Lppk ,
respectively. All lists are empty at first. As the game proceeds,
AI interacts with CI as follows:
1) HashQureyH1 : List Lh1 is maintained as:
(PIDi , Ri , Kpub , h1i ). When AI makes a query to
H1 , CI checks at first whether it is stored in Lh1 . If it
is true, then the corresponding h1i is returned to AI .
Otherwise, CI issues a query to CreateU ser with PIDi ,
returns to AI with h1i obtained from the oracle and finally
inserts a new entry (PIDi , Ri , Kpub , h1i ) to Lh1 .

2) HashQureyH2 : List Lh2 is particularly maintained as:
(PIDi , Xi , Kpub , Ri , Ti , h2i ). When AI makes a query to
H2 , CI checks at first whether it is stored in Lh2 . If it
is true, then the corresponding h2i is returned to AI .
Otherwise, CI randomly chooses a value h2i ∈ Zq∗ and
sets h2 (P IDi , Xi , Kpub , Ri , Ti ) = h2i . CI returns h2i to
AI and finally inserts a new entry to Lh2 .
3) HashQureyH3 : List Lh3 is particularly maintained as:
(PIDi , Mi , P Ki , Ui , Ti , h3i ). When AI makes a query
to H3 , CI checks at first whether it is stored in Lh3 . If
it is true, then the corresponding h3i is returned to AI .
Otherwise, CI randomly selects a value h3i ∈ Zq∗ and let
h3 (PIDi , Mi , P Ki , Ui , Ti ) = h3i . CI returns h3i to AI
and finally inserts a new entry to Lh3 .
4) U serCreate: Lists Lpk , Lsv , and Lppk are maintained as:
(PIDi , Ri , Xi ), (PIDi , xi ), (PIDi , di ) respectively. When
AI issues a query to U serCreate on input PIDi , CI
checks at first whether it is stored in Lpk . If it is true,
then the corresponding public key (Ri , Xi ) is returned to
AI . Otherwise, CI handles the query in the following two
situations:
a) PIDi = PID∗i : CI selects ai , bi , ci ∈ Zq∗ randomly and
sets di = ai , h1i = bi , xi = ci . Next, CI calculates
Ri = ai P − bi Kpub , Xi = ci P .
b) PIDi = PID∗i : CI selects ri , bi , ci ∈ Zq∗ randomly and
sets di =⊥, h1i = bi , xi = ci . Next, CI calculates
Ri = ri P , Xi = ci P .
After that, CI searches Lh1 to check if an entry
(PIDi , Ri , Kpub , h1i ) already exists and h1i = bi . If it
is true, then aborts the game. Otherwise CI adds new
entries to Lh1 , Lpk , Lsv , and Lppk separately then returns
P KPIDi = (Ri , Xi ) as response.
5) P ublicKeyReplace: When AI issues a query to
P ublicKeyReplace on input (PIDi , xi , Ri , Xi ), CI
then looks up Lpk and Lsv , updates the entry with
(PIDi , Ri , Xi ) and (PIDi , xi ) respectively. Note that it is
possible for xi to be “⊥”.
6) P artialP rivateKeyExtract: When AI makes a query
to P artialP rivateKeyExtract on input PIDi , CI
checks at first whether it is stored in Lppk . If it is true,
then the corresponding di is returned to AI . Otherwise,
CI issues a query to CreateU ser with PIDi , returns to
AI with di obtained from the oracle and finally inserts a
new entry (PIDi , di ) to Lppk . Note that CI may abort the
simulation and return “⊥” if PIDi = PID∗i .
7) SecretV alueExtract: When AI makes a query to
SecretV alueExtract on input PIDi , CI checks at first
whether it is stored in Lsv . If it is true, then the corresponding xi is returned to AI . Otherwise, CI issues a query to
CreateU ser with PIDi , returns to AI with xi obtained
from the oracle and finally inserts a new entry (PIDi , xi )
to Lsv . If AI has queried P ublicKeyReplace with P IDi
but does not offer a correct secret value xi , we assume that
SecretV alueExtract is not able to be queried using the
same PIDi .
8) Sign: When AI sends a query to Sign on input
(PIDi , Mi ), CI first checks whether it exists in Lpk . If

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

not, CI queries CreateU ser with PIDi and updates the
corresponding entries in all lists. CI recovers parameters necessary for generating signature from Lh1 , Lpk ,
Lppk , Lsv , respectively. Next, depending on queries to
P ublicKeyReplace are issued or not, CI will handle AI ’s
query in the following two cases:
a) If PIDi = PID∗i and the public key hasn’t been replaced, CI executes Sign algorithm and adds h2i , h3i to
Lh2 , Lh3 . Finally returns (Ui , si ) to Ai as the response.
b) Otherwise, CI randomly selects three various numbers
si , h2i , h3i ∈ Zq∗ and computes Ui = si P − h2i (Ri +
h1i Ppub ) − h3i Xi . Finally, CI returns (Ui , si ) to Ai as
the response and adds h2i , h3i to Lh2 , Lh3 separately.
F orge: As we demonstrated in our security model, it is
not obligatory that all the signatures for aggregating are
forged. Nevertheless, the target identity PID∗i ’s signature must
be forged. In other words, AI must give a forged but
valid signature (Ui∗ , s∗i ) for (PID∗i , Mi∗ ), without querying
P artialP rivateKeyExtract and Sign by P IDi∗ .
Based on forking lemma [28], CI has the capability to replay
multiple times of the game with identical random type but
∗(j)
∗(j)
different hash values h2i and h3i , Thus, AI is able to produce
∗(j)
four valid signatures (Ui∗ , si ), j ∈ (1, 2, 3, 4). Without loss of
generality the following equation is true:
∗(j)

si

∗(j)

∗(j)

= u∗i + (ri + ah1i )h2i + xi h3i .

Note that j ∈ (1, 2, 3, 4) and a, u∗i , ri , and xi are unknown
variables. Further, according to the above linear and independent
formulas, CI can figure a out. Also, as the answer to an ECDLP
instance. The probability SuccCI of this can be further analyzed
as follows.
We define three events:
e1 . CI doesn’t abort the game during all queries to
P artialP rivateKeyExtract.
e2 . AI successfully forges a valid tuple (PIDi , Mi , Ui , si ).
e3 . The tuple satisfies PIDi = PID∗i .
CI succeeds when all the above three events happen.
Assuming that the times of accessing HashQureyH1 and
P artialP rivateKeyExtract are QH and Qppk , respectively.
If AI can forge a signature with a non-negligible possibility
SuccAI , SuccCI can be computed as follows.
SuccCI = P r[Ee1 ∧ Ee2 ∧ Ee3 ]
= P r[Ee1 ]P r[Ee2 | Ee1 ]P r[Ee3 | Ee1 ∧ Ee2 ]
≥ (1 −

1
1 Qppk
)
SuccAI
.
QH
QH

We can deduce from the above that CI can crack an ECDLP
instance with a non-negligible possibility. However, depending
on the hardness of ECDLP, this conclusion is contradictory. In
this way, we can prove Theorem 1 is correct.
Theorem 1: Under the random oracle model, for a Type I
PPT (probabilistic polynomial time) adversary AI , our raised
CLAS scheme is EUF-CMA on the premise that the ECDLP is
intricate.

3829

Lemma 2: Under the random oracle model, on the condition
that a Type II PPT adversary AII can forge a valid aggregate
signature successfully with a non-negligible probability through
the interaction with challenger CII , then we believe that using
the adversary AII ’s capability, CII can solve an ECDLP instance
with a non-negligible probability.
Proof: Considering AII and CII interact with each other as
Game 2 described previously. Assume that CII maintains an
ECDLP instance: given P , Q = xP , CII ’s purpose is to calculate
x as an answer of ECDLP by taking advantage of AII . For this
purpose, CII selects an anonymous challenge identity PID∗i and
carries out as below:
Setup: CII initializes params = {P, q, E, G, h1 , h2 , h3 ,
Kpub } and set Kpub = aP . Next, CII sends master private key a
and params to AII .
Query: CII simulates H1 , H2 , and H3 as hash oracles.
Besides, lists Lh1 , Lh2 , Lh3 are maintained to record the queries
of hash oracles. In addition, AII ’s queries to secret value, user
public key and partial private key are also kept in lists Lsv ,
Lpk , Lppk , respectively. All lists are empty at first. As the game
proceeds, AII interacts with CII as follows:
1) HashQureyH1 : List Lh1 is maintained as:
(PIDi , Ri , Kpub , h1i ). When AII makes a query to
H1 , CII checks at first whether it is stored in Lh1 . If it
is true, then the corresponding h1i is returned to AII .
Otherwise, CII issues a query to CreateU ser with PIDi ,
responds to AII with h1i obtained from the oracle and
finally inserts a new entry to Lh1 .
2) HashQureyH2 : List Lh2 is particularly maintained as:
(PIDi , Xi , Kpub , Ri , Ti , h2i ). When AII makes a query
to H2 , CII checks at first whether it is stored in Lh2 . If
it is true, then the corresponding h2i is returned to AII .
Otherwise, CII randomly chooses a value h2i ∈ Zq∗ and
sets h2 (PIDi , Xi , Kpub , Ri , Ti ) = h2i . CII returns h2i to
AII and finally inserts a new entry to Lh2 .
3) HashQureyH3 : List Lh3 is particularly maintained as:
(PIDi , Mi , P Ki , Ui , Ti , h3i ). When AII makes a query
to H3 on input (PIDi , Mi , P Ki , Ui , Ti ), CII checks
at first whether it is stored in Lh3 . If it is true,
then the corresponding h3i is returned to AII . Otherwise, CII randomly chooses a value h3i ∈ Zq∗ , sets
h3 (PIDi , Mi , P Ki , Ui , Ti ) = h3i . CII returns h3i to AII
and finally inserts a new entry to Lh3 .
4) U serCreate: Lists Lpk , Lsv , Lppk are maintained as:
(PIDi , Ri , Xi ), (PIDi , xi ), (PIDi , di ), respectively. When
AII issues a query to U serCreate on input PIDi , CII
checks at first whether it is stored in Lpk . If it is true,
then the corresponding public key (Ri , Xi ) is returned to
AII . Otherwise, CII handles the query in the following
two situations:
r PIDi = PID∗i : CII selects ri , bi , ci ∈ Zq∗ randomly and sets
h1i = bi , di = ri + ah1i , xi = ci . Next, CII calculates
Ri = ri P , Xi = ci P .
r PIDi = PID∗i : CII selects ri , bi ∈ Zq∗ randomly and sets
xi =⊥, h1i = bi , di = ri + ah1i . Next, CII calculates
Ri = ri P , Xi = Q. After that, CII searches Lh1 to check if
an entry (PIDi , Ri , Kpub , h1i ) already exists and h1i = bi .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3830

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

If it is true, then aborts the game. Otherwise CII adds new
entries to Lh1 , Lpk , Lsv , and Lppk separately then returns
P KPIDi = (Ri , Xi ) as response.
5) P ublicKeyReplace: Cause AII is a Type II adversary, it
doesn’t own the capability to replace a certain public key.
6) P artialP rivateKeyExtract: When AII makes a query
to P artialP rivateKeyExtract on input PIDi , CII
checks at first whether it is stored in Lppk . If it is true,
then the corresponding di is returned to AII . Otherwise,
CII issues a query to CreateU ser with PIDi , returns to
AII with di obtained from the oracle and finally inserts a
new entry (PIDi , di ) to Lppk .
7) SecretV alueExtract: When AII makes a query to
SecretV alueExtract on input PIDi , CII checks at first
whether it is stored in Lsv . If it is true, then the corresponding xi is returned to AII . Otherwise, CII issues a
query to CreateU ser with PIDi , returns to AII with xi
obtained from the response and finally inserts a new entry
(PIDi , xi ) to Lsv . It is essential that CII may abort the
simulation and return “⊥” if PIDi = PID∗i .
8) Sign: When AII makes a query to Sign on input
(PIDi , Mi ), CII first checks whether it exists in Lpk . If
not, CII queries CreateU ser with PIDi and updates the
corresponding entries in all lists. CII recovers parameters
necessary for generating signature from Lh1 , Lpk , Lppk ,
and Lsv respectively. Next, CII will handle AII ’s query
in the following two cases:
a) PIDi = PID∗i , CII executes as Sign algorithm and adds
h2i , h3i to Lh2 , Lh3 . Finally returns (Ui , si ) to AII as the
response.
b) Otherwise, CII randomly selects three various numbers
si , h2i , h3i ∈ Zq∗ and computes Ui = si P − h2i (Ri +
h1i Kpub ) − h3i Xi . Finally, CII returns (Ui , si ) to AII as
the response and adds h2i , h3i to Lh2 , Lh3 separately.
F orge: First, CII will abort the simulation if PIDi = PID∗i .
Similar to what we have demonstrated in the proof of Theorem 1, AII must submit a forged but valid signature (Ui∗ , s∗i ) for
(PID∗i , Mi∗ ), without querying SecretV alueExtract and Sign
by PID∗i .
In the same way, CII replays the game multiple times with
∗(j)
∗(j)
identical random type but different hash values h2i and h3i
∗(j)
and produces three valid signatures (Ui∗ , si ), j ∈ (1, 2, 3)
hold that
∗(j)

si

∗(j)

∗(j)

= u∗i + (ri + ah1i )h2i + xi h3i .

Note that j ∈ (1, 2, 3) and u∗i , ri , and xi are unknown variables. Likewise, CII can figure out secret value x, also as the
answer to ECDLP instance. The probability SuccCII can be
further analyzed as follows.
We first define three events:
e1 . CII does not abort the game during all queries to
SecretV alueExtract.
e2 . AII successfully forges a valid tuple (PIDi , Mi , Ui , si ).
e3 . The tuple satisfies PIDi = PID∗i .

CII succeeds when all the above three events happen.
Assuming that the times of accessing HashQureyH1 and
SecretV alueExtract are QH and Qsv , respectively. Considering AII can forge a valid signature with a non-negligible
possibility SuccAII , SuccCII can be computed as
SuccCII = P r[Ee1 ∧ Ee2 ∧ Ee3 ]
= P r[Ee1 ]P r[Ee2 | Ee1 ]P r[Ee3 | Ee1 ∧ Ee2 ]
Qsv

1
1
SuccAII
.
≥ 1−
QH
QH
We can deduce from above that CII can crack an ECDLP
instance with a non-negligible possibility. However, depending
on the hardness of ECDLP, this conclusion is contradictory. In
this way, we can prove Theorem 2 is correct.
Theorem 2: Under the random oracle model, for a Type II
PPT adversary AII , our CLAS scheme is EUF-CMA on the
premise that the ECDLP is intricate.
D. Privacy and Informal Security Analysis
In Section IV-D, we briefly introduce the security and privacy
requirements in VANETs. In this section, We will further analyze
our proposed scheme to demonstrate that it meets the specific
requirements mentioned above.
1) Mutual authentication: According to formal security proof
and correctness proof mentioned in the previous section, an adversary cannot forge a signature without legitimate private key. Besides, verifier node in VANETs
can ensure
whether sP

 the authentication by checking
= U + ni=1 (Ri + h1i Kpub )h2i + ni=1 Xi h3i is established or not in the signature verification phase. Therefore,
our scheme provides message mutual authentication.
2) Conditional anonymity: In VANETs, a vehicle node Vi
takes the pseudonym anonymous identity PIDi to participate in network communication. Except T A can recover
the real identity RIDi through the master private key b,
it is impossible for other nodes to trace the real identity
corresponding to the pseudoanonymous identity.
3) Message integrity: In our proposed scheme, based on
collision-resistant hash function, we calculate and compare the hash values to check whether the data has been
tampered or not in the communication channel. By this
way, we ensure the integrity of message.
4) Unlinkability: In the communication process, vehicles
take different pseudonym indentities to communicate with
each other and each pseudonym identity is updated over
time. Thus, there is no relationship between the new
pseudonym identity and the old pseudonym identity. The
attacker cannot judge the connection between them, so
proposed scheme can provide unlinkability.
5) Man-in-the-middle attack: In this scheme, vehicles and
RSUs will authenticate each other mutually. An attacker
cannot pretend itself to be a legitimate entity, neither can
it to send a valid message. Thus, a malicious node cannot
launch a man-in-the-middle attack.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

3831

TABLE II
COMPARSION IN ASPECT OF TIME CONSUMPTION WITH RELEVANT SCHEMES (100 USERS AGGREGATED)

6) Replay attack: In our proposed scheme, a timestamp Ti is involved in authentication message
{P IDi , Xi , Mi , Ti , σi } to provide freshness. Through
Ti verifiers can determine whether the message has been
replayed or not.
7) Denial of service attack: In our proposed scheme, an
invalid vehicle node does not own a private key and
thus cannot generate a valid message transmitting in
VANETs. Besides, suppose a legitimate user generates a
large number of signature messages in a short term and
broadcasts them in the network, TA will trace its real
identity and prohibit it from sending messages again for a
certain period of time. So, proposed scheme can resist DoS
attack.
8) Impersonation attack and signature forgery attack: According to the formal security proof we presented in the
previous section, based on Theorems 1 and 2, We can
draw a conclusion that as long as the ECDLP problem is
difficult, no PPT adversary can forge a valid signature.
Thus, our scheme can resist impersonation attack and
signature forgery attack.
VII. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION
We analyze and evaluate the performance of our scheme in this
section by estimating the computation time cost. The experiment
results show that our raised proposal can meet the security
requirements in a resource-constrained situation with relatively
lower computation overhead in comparison with Han et al.’s
primary proposal [5] and other CLAS schemes (see [6], [7], [8],
[9]). Hence, our scheme has strong adaptability for VANETs.
To maintain an appropriate security level equivalent to 1024-b
RSA algorithm, we construct a cyclic group G based on elliptic
curve E : y 2 = x3 + ax + b mod p on a finite field Zq∗ . The
length of q and elements in G is indicated as 40 B and 80 B
correspondingly. Furthermore, as for pairing-based calculation,
we use the double-Tate-Pairing e : G1 × G1 → G2 defined on
the singular curve E : y 2 = x3 + x mod p1 based on a finite
field Zq∗1 , on which p1 and q1 represents a 160 and 512 b prime
number separately.
Our experiment evaluation was performed on basis of the
MIRACL [29] multiprecision cryptographic library on a Linux

TABLE III
TIME CONSUMPTION OF OPERATIONS (IN MILLISECONDS)

virtual machine (Lenovo with Intel(R) Core(TM) 3.40 GHz i76700 processor, 8 GB memory, Ubuntu18.04 operating system).
According to the results of our implementation, we record the
execution time of relevant cryptographic operations in Table III.
We evaluate and analyze the calculation overhead of a single Sign &Verify algorithm and Aggregate &Aggregate Verify
algorithm in different schemes. In our proposed scheme, we
calculate two times of general hash to Zq∗ and one time of
point multiplication for individual signature phase. As for an
individual verification phase, there are three times of general
hash operation, three times of point addition and four times of
point multiplication. For an aggregate signature phase, assuming
n is the total user amount, we need 2n − 2 times of point
addition. Last, 3n times of general hash to Zq∗ , 3n + 1 times
of point addition as well as 3n times of point multiplication
are necessary for an aggregate verification phase. Based on the
running time of a single cryptographic operation recorded in
Table III, we give the detailed comparison results of various
schemes at different phases in Table II.
As indicated in Figs. 2 and 3, compared with schemes presented in [5]–[9], our scheme is much more time-saving than Kumar et al. [6] and Wu et al. [7] in single signature generation (by
a percentage of (5.458 − 0.979)/5.458 × 100 ≈ 82.1% in [6]
and (8.989 − 0.979)/8.989 × 100 ≈ 89.1% in [7]) and verification (by a percentage of (11.884 − 3.903)/11.884 × 100 ≈
67.2% in [6] and (12.855 − 3.903)/12.855 × 100 ≈ 69.7% in
[7]), cause we give up expensive bilinear pairing calculation.
Compared with Gayathri et al. [8] and Liu et al. [9], our scheme
is superior in the aspect of security and signature generation
time. The improvement in performance efficiency of our proposed scheme about single sign computation cost over both [8]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3832

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

calculation costs and communication bandwidth compared with
other existing relevant schemes. In summary, our scheme is more
suitable and robust in the practice of VANETs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the invaluable suggestions
provided by the anonymous reviewers and the associate editor.
REFERENCES

Fig. 2.

Execution time of Single sign and verify (in milliseconds).

Fig. 3. 100 users Aggregate Signing&Verifying time of different scheme (in
milliseconds).

and [9] is about (1.95 − 0.979)/1.95 × 100 ≈ 49.8%. And the
enhanced percentage of signature verification time is (4.866 −
3.903)/4.866 × 100 ≈ 19.8% compared with [8]. Finally, although our scheme is less efficient than the original Han et al. [5]
in single signature generation (by a percentage of (0.979 −
0.971)/0.979 × 100 ≈ 0.8%) and single signature verification
(by a percentage of (3.903 − 1.943)/3.903 × 100 ≈ 50.2%),
our solution fixes its defects and achieves an enhanced-security
level. In summary, our proposal strikes a compromise between
security and efficiency. It is more suitable for scenario with
limited resources like VANETs.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In VANETs, applying a CLAS scheme can provide an efficient
and secure data authentication without numerous computation
and communication overhead. In this article, we have reviewed
and evaluated the security of Han et al.’s pairing-free CLAS
scheme. By providing a concrete attacking example, we show
that their scheme is not immune to a malicious network member.
To renovate the security flaws, we put forward a securityenhanced scheme, which is proved to be EUF-CMA in the
random oracle model. In addition, performance and evaluation of
our implementation indicate our solution owns relatively lower

[1] M. S. Sheikh and J. Liang, “A comprehensive survey on vanet security services in traffic management system,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 2019, pp. 2423915:1–2423915:23, 2019.
[2] S. S. Al-Riyami and K. G. Paterson, “Certificateless public key cryptography,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Appl. Cryptol. Inf. Secur., 2003,
pp. 452–473.
[3] D. Boneh, C. Gentry, B. Lynn, and H. Shacham, “Aggregate and verifiably
encrypted signatures from bilinear maps,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Appl.
Cryptographic Techn., 2003, pp. 416–432.
[4] R. Castro and R. Dahab, “Efficient certificateless signatures suitable for
aggregation,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol. 2007, 2007, Art. no. 454.
[5] Y. Han, W. Song, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, and B. Yuan, “eclas: An efficient
pairing-free certificateless aggregate signature for secure vanet communication,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1637–1648, Mar. 2022.
[6] P. Kumar, S. Kumari, V. Sharma, A. K. Sangaiah, J. Wei, and X. Li, “A
certificateless aggregate signature scheme for healthcare wireless sensor
network,” Sustain. Comput., Inform. Syst., vol. 18, pp. 80–89, 2018.
[7] L. Wu, Z. Xu, D. He, and X. Wang, “New certificateless aggregate signature
scheme for healthcare multimedia social network on cloud environment,”
Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, pp. 2595273:1–2595273:13, 2018.
[8] N. Gayathri et al., “Efficient and secure pairing-free certificateless aggregate signature scheme for healthcare wireless medical sensor networks,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9064–9075, Oct. 2019.
[9] J. Liu, L. Wang, and Y. Yu, “Improved security of a pairing-free certificateless aggregate signature in healthcare wireless medical sensor networks,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5256–5266, Jun. 2020.
[10] L. Shen, J. Ma, X. Liu, and M. Miao, “A provably secure aggregate
signature scheme for healthcare wireless sensor networks,” J. Med. Syst.,
vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[11] J. Tang, A. Liu, M. Zhao, and T. Wang, “An aggregate signature based trust
routing for data gathering in sensor networks,” Secur. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 2018, pp. 6328504:1–6328504:30, 2018.
[12] S. Chatterjee, D. Hankerson, E. Knapp, and A. Menezes, “Comparing two
pairing-based aggregate signature schemes,” Designs, Codes Cryptogr.,
vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 141–167, 2010.
[13] S. Lu, R. Ostrovsky, A. Sahai, H. Shacham, and B. Waters, “Sequential
aggregate signatures and multisignatures without random oracles,” in Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. Theory Appl. Cryptographic Techn., 2006, pp. 465–485.
[14] Y. Zhao, “Practical aggregate signature from general elliptic curves, and
applications to blockchain,” in Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun.
Secur., 2019, pp. 529–538.
[15] C. Gentry and Z. Ramzan, “Identity-based aggregate signatures,” in Proc.
Int. Workshop Public Key Cryptogr., 2006, pp. 257–273.
[16] K.-A. Shim, “An id-based aggregate signature scheme with constant
pairing computations,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1873–1880,
2010.
[17] A. Bagherzandi and S. Jarecki, “Identity-based aggregate and multisignature schemes based on rsa,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Public Key
Cryptogr., 2010, pp. 480–498.
[18] T. Asami et al., “Moderator-controlled information sharing by identitybased aggregate signatures for information centric networking,” in Proc.
2nd ACM Conf. Inf.-Centric Netw., 2015, pp. 157–166.
[19] L. Shen, J. Ma, X. Liu, F. Wei, and M. Miao, “A secure and efficient
id-based aggregate signature scheme for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 546–554, Apr. 2017.
[20] H. Xiong, Z. Guan, Z. Chen, and F. Li, “An efficient certificateless
aggregate signature with constant pairing computations,” Inf. Sci., vol. 219,
pp. 225–235, 2013.
[21] D. He, M. Tian, and J. Chen, “Insecurity of an efficient certificateless
aggregate signature with constant pairing computations,” Inf. Sci., vol. 268,
pp. 458–462, 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHENG et al.: SECURITY-ENHANCED PAIRING-FREE CERTIFICATELESS AGGREGATE SIGNATURE FOR VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS

[22] Y.-C. Chen, R. Tso, M. Mambo, K. Huang, and G. Horng, “Certificateless
aggregate signature with efficient verification,” Secur. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 2232–2243, 2015.
[23] H. Liu, M. Liang, and H. Sun, “A secure and efficient certificateless aggregate signature scheme,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals Electron., Commun.
Comput. Sci., vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 991–995, 2014.
[24] J. Zhang, X. Zhao, and J. Mao, “Attack on chen et al.’s certificateless aggregate signature scheme,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 54–59,
2016.
[25] D. He, J. Chen, and R. Zhang, “An efficient and provably-secure certificateless signature scheme without bilinear pairings,” Int. J. Commun. Syst.,
vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1432–1442, 2012.
[26] Y. Zhan, B. Wang, and R. Lu, “Cryptanalysis and improvement of a
pairing-free certificateless aggregate signature in healthcare wireless medical sensor networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5973–5984,
Apr. 2021.
[27] X. Huang, Y. Mu, W. Susilo, D. S. Wong, and W. Wu, “Certificateless
signature revisited,” in Proc. Australas. Conf. Inf. Secur. Privacy, 2007,
pp. 308–322.
[28] D. Pointcheval and J. Stern, “Security arguments for digital signatures and
blind signatures,” J. Cryptol., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 361–396, 2000.
[29] Miracl Ltd., “Miracl Cryptographic SDK: Multiprecision integer and
rational arithmetic cryptographic library,” 2018. Accessed: Dec. 7, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/miracl/MIRACL

Hangcheng Zheng received the bachelor’s degree
in information security from the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
master’s degree in cyber science and engineering with
the Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China.
His research interests include blockchain and cryptography.

Min Luo received the Ph.D.degree in computer science from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2003.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China. His research interests
mainly include applied cryptography and blockchain
technology.

3833

Yunru Zhang received the bachelor’s and master’s
degrees in computer science from Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively. She is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in cyber
science and engineering with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China.
Her main research interests include cryptography
and information security, in particular, authentication
key agreement, cryptographic protocols, and zeroknowledge proof.

Cong Peng received the M.S. degree in applied mathematics from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in
2013. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degrees in applied mathematics from Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China.
His major research interests include elliptic curves,
cryptography, and information security.

Qi Feng received the master’s degree in computer
science from the School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2018. She is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in cyber science and
engineering with the Key Laboratory of Aerospace
Information Security and Trusted Computing Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
This work is done when visiting State Key Laboratory of Cryptology, Beijing, China. Her research
interests include cryptographic protocols.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. Downloaded on August 16,2026 at 14:18:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

