

========== PAGE 1 ==========
Csaba Krasznay
Case Study:
The NotPetya Campaign
Introduction
The range of malicious acts affecting cyberspace is endless, but there are events
that provide a red line and a point of reference for researchers. The attack on Esto -
nia in 2007, the deployment of the Stuxnet malicious code, the leak of information
by Edward Snowden were all such events when we had to re-evaluate our views
on cyberspace. From the perspective of the present study, the NotPetya malicious
code campaign is a turning point that explains the importance of international
law and international relations in connection to cyber events. This incident has
highlighted some critical points on the field of external relations, which showed
in practice that the creation of the Tallinn Manual or the proposal for a Digital
Geneva Convention was necessary because of the practice of some countries in
interpreting international norms freely.
The Technical Perspective
According to a summary in the Wired magazine, the NotPetya campaign started
on the afternoon of 27 June 2017, in the last working hours of the working day
before the celebration of the Ukrainian Constitution. The date of the first infec -
tions was food for thought, as choosing a prominent holiday of the Republic of
Ukraine as the beginning of the attack was a signal message. Meanwhile, at
that moment it was still probable that the time was also chosen according to a
plan based on the fact that the majority of IT operators would be on leave, so the
defence would work with lower resources. Although the malware appeared soon
in other countries, most of the infected machines were reported from Ukraine,
so it is suspected that the target was Ukraine as a state and not some companies
were on the crosshairs. In other countries, including Germany, France, Italy,
Poland and the United States, there were only collateral damages. This theory is
https://doi.org/10.36250/01039_05


========== PAGE 2 ==========
110
further reinforced by the fact that an explosive device hidden in a motor vehicle
killed a member of the Special Forces in Kiev on the same day.
1
The malicious code had the characteristics of a ransomware, encrypting the
hard drive after infection, and asking for 300 USD in bitcoin in exchange for
unlocking the machine. However, it soon became clear that the email address
provided for the contact was not alive, so there was no chance of recovering the
lost data. If the attack was financially motivated, as in the case of WannaCry a
month before NotPetya, the attacker would have remained available and would
have secured the return of the data in exchange for a ransom, as the victim only
paid if there was a chance for the decryption as it was learnt from similar crimes.
The characteristics of a ransomware in the early hours was also emphasised by the
fact that the code showed similarities to the well-known Petya ransomware, but
it was soon discovered that it was intentional camouflage, so the name NotPetya,
or Non Petya, became widespread among cybersecurity experts.
In terms of mechanism of action, the malicious code infected the computer’s
master boot record, the hard disk segment responsible for loading the operating
system, and began encrypting the file system after the machine was started. If that
succeeded, it showed a typical ransomware message on the screen, indicating how
much money it was asking for the decryption and how the communication was
possible with the cybercriminals. Before making the machine unusable, it tried
to spread to the network on which the infected machine was located. It used the
EternalBlue vulnerability, and as it could be seen in case of WannaCry, it started
to spread on the previously non-updated computers, meanwhile it collected the
administrator password from the infected machine’s memory, that also could
give access to other networked machines.
The first infections were assumed to have come through a software update
mechanism of the MEDoc application. This software is one of the officially
approved tax return programs, so it runs on a significant part of Ukrainian compa
 -
nies. This program indicated that it needed to be updated, and then after the user
allowed the patches to be installed, the infection began. There is no information
on how they could influence the MEDoc update process. From remote hacking
to direct, physical access to the update server, there are a number of possible
solutions to consider. It seems certain that the attacker gained administrative
privileges on one of MEDoc’s servers, which allowed him to intervene in the
1
 Andy Greenberg: Petya Ransomware Epidemic May Be Spillover From Cyberwar.
Wired,
 28
June 2017.


========== PAGE 3 ==========
111
update mechanism as well. According to an investigation by the cybersecurity
company Talos, as early as 24 April 2017, an update was released to users that
included a backdoor, so in principle, it allowed the attack to be carried out.
Therefore, the attackers started preparing for the action months earlier. Against
WannaCry, there was not any hidden code or so-called “kill switch”, which would
have enabled the rapid shutdown of the infection. The attacker’s goal was clearly
the largest, geographically most localised destruction.
2
Eventually, thousands of Ukrainian companies were hit by the incident. The
victims include certain critical Ukrainian infrastructures, including Ukrainian
banks, the Kiev Borispol Airport, and energy companies such as Kyivenergo and
Ukrenergo. But several foreign companies have also reported infections, such as
the American medical company Merck, the Russian Rosnyeft and the Hungar
 -
ian OTP Bank in Ukraine, whose ATMs displayed the images of the NotPetya
infection for days. Most publicity was given to the devastation at A. P. Moller –
Maersk. This company is the 558
th
 largest conglomerate in the world according
to the Forbes Global 2000 list of companies, one of the largest logistics com
 -
panies in the world. The NotPetya infection reportedly made it impossible for
the company to operate for two days. Loading of cargo ships worldwide had to
be controlled manually, relying on paper and pencil instead of a computer. This
was also reflected in the Danish company’s revenue, with their quarterly report
estimating that they suffered between $200 million and $300 million in damage
from this two-day shutdown.
3
International Law Perspective
The NotPetya malicious code is the first cyber incident that appears to be a
coordinated attack on a sovereign state in peacetime, attacking its critical infra
 -
structures, civilian facilities, causing additional damage to civilian companies
operating in other countries as well. Its purpose was clearly destruction. Tools
used by the malicious code were previously known, as neither the vulnerability
exploited for network propagation nor the software that was used to access the
credentials of privileged users caused a surprise to professionals. However, attack
2
 David Maynor et al.: The MeDoc Connection.
Talos Intelligence,
 05 July 2017.
3
 Maersk Press Room:
A. P. Moller – Maersk Improves Underlying Profit and Grows Revenue
in First Half of the Year.
 16 August 2017.


========== PAGE 4 ==========
112
tactics were completely new, preceded by a thorough operational planning, as the
MEDoc software chosen for distribution was unknown beyond Ukraine, only
adequate intelligence could confirm that this propagation vector could be so
effective in carrying out a geographically focused cyberattack. The psychological
or social engineering twist in the attack should also be emphasised, which led
the victims to believe that a version of MEDoc that would open a backdoor for
malicious code should be installed. For decades, cybersecurity professionals have
been aware that both end-users and IT operators need to use the latest version
of software, so if a software update is available, it should be installed as soon
as possible. Therefore, the attacker built the distribution on this foundation,
believing that users would install anything that appears to be an update as soon
as possible, without question, so attacking the update server and using it as a
distribution point is a brilliant choice.
From the states’ perspective, the right answer should be decided if there is
a cybersecurity incident that looks like a cyberwarfare activity, in which an
advanced cyber weapon was deployed in a country that has previously suffered
such targeted attacks and it is used regularly as a weapons test site by another
country. Can it be said that this incident is classified as an attack within the
meaning of international law? Can they use the means of attribution, or name a
country an attacker? On the other hand, the question is also whether international
diplomacy is prepared to deal with the countermeasures of the named country
by traditional diplomatic means after such a declaration? Finally, the question is
also whether the named attacking country can be put under pressure as a result
of which it will reduce or end its hostilities in cyberspace?
Schmitt and Biller examined how the incident relates to the requirements of
international law a few weeks after the NotPetya attack. Their first remark was
that the malicious code was not reported to have caused injury or death. The
author of the present study adds that, although no direct deaths were reported
for either NotPetya or WannaCry, it cannot be excluded that non-functioning
electronic information systems in some healthcare facilities, especially in case
of WannaCry, may have contributed indirectly to deaths in the U.K. healthcare
system that could have been prevented if the patient had been provided with
appropriate care in a timely manner. Schmitt and Biller link accountability
to attribution, i.e. the main question is whether the attack was backed by
a country’s armed forces, intelligence agencies, or whether the instructions
were given by a state actor in case of a non-state attacker. Assuming that this
has happened, a breach of three state obligations can be presumed. These are


========== PAGE 5 ==========
113
respect for sovereignty, the principle of non-interference and the prohibition
of the use of force.
According to Schmitt and Biller, sovereignty was violated during the Not
 -
Petya attack because of two conditions. On the one hand, a violation of territorial
integrity, which in cyberspace can be imagined as an attack causing physical
damage or personal injury, possibly death. In a broad interpretation, if a cyber
infrastructure becomes unavailable for an extended period of time, in the opin
 -
ion of the authors, a violation of territorial integrity can also be formulated.
Because NotPetya went beyond the effects of an average distributed denial of
service attack, specifically involving the loss of key data and the need to deploy
new machines instead of disrupted critical computer systems, this can be seen
as damage to physical facilities. The other condition would be the disruption
of core government activities, but this was not the case for NotPetya. Although
the IT systems that enable financial institutions to operate are damaged, they
do not support basic government functionality, so this condition for violating
sovereignty did not exist.
Violations of the principle of non-interference are accompanied by coercive
actions taken by one state against another in order to change its political, eco
 -
nomic, social and cultural order and to influence foreign policy. Schmitt and
Biller did not see evidence that the NotPetya malicious code was capable of
achieving these purposes, given that its purpose was destruction and not influ
 -
ence. If the cyber weapon had indeed been a ransomware virus, which seemed
at first glance, coercion would in principle have been possible since the essence
of ransom is to extort some decision from the other party.
The principle of the use of force in peacetime means that a state engages in a
violent activity that does not qualify as self-defence or collective defence without
a UN mandate. Activities in the cyberspace typically have little impact on the
physical environment, making it difficult to imagine an attack that reaches an
unauthorised level of use of force. The long-term outage of a cyber infrastruc
 -
ture as computers or network devices become inaccessible due to a malicious
code like NotPetya, however, could be classified as unauthorised use of force.
According to the authors, economic destabilisation may also fall into this cate
 -
gory. According to the Ukrainian Government, the cyberattack has reached this
level, but international practice in mid-2017 has not yet provided a clear answer
as to where the threshold is.
The authors’ opinion is that international humanitarian law would be valid in
this case if there were an international armed conflict between two states, namely


========== PAGE 6 ==========
114
Ukraine and, suppose, Russia. The condition in that case is that one country occu
 -
pies the territory of another country or supports a non-state group that engages in
hostile activity against the other country. Given the support of the Crimean Penin
 -
sula and the uprisings in eastern Ukraine, the authors see a legitimate presumption
of an armed conflict between the two states, therefore the use of NotPetya should
also be examined under international humanitarian law, despite the fact that in the
UN GGE there is no full agreement on this.
4
 The classification of this malicious
code should be examined in the light of the Tallinn Handbook, which states that
the use of such cyber weapons is an attack even if it does not directly damage the
cyber infrastructure, only has indirect effects. According to some experts, the inac
-
cessibility of such infrastructure also belongs to that set.
NotPetya’s targets included the Kiev Airport, the Chernobyl power plant,
and the Ukrainian healthcare system. If it can be assumed that this was done
in accordance with the attacker’s intention and not due to the uncoordinated
spread of the malicious code, this can be classified as an attack according to the
authors. Although some of the disputed facilities could be classified as dual use,
such as the airport, most elements of cyber infrastructure are clearly civilian, not
serving military purposes, so the act could even fall into the category of a war
crime. In addition, the impact of cyber weapons went beyond Ukraine, it also had
an impact on third countries, so their neutrality was violated by the attacker.
5
All of these are, of course, only the scientific thinking of researchers, as men
 -
tioning war crimes in case of a cyberattack can have serious diplomatic implica
 -
tions, if it is done by a politician in charge. As it can be read in the next chapter,
states use moderate expressions, even if they have a strong diplomatic reaction.
NotPetya, on the other hand, is special that in addition to researcher positions,
there have been comments and then political resolutions that should be taken
more seriously than theoretical reasoning. First, researchers from NATO’s Center
for Excellence in Cooperative Cyber Defense analysed the situation. The quoted
Michael Schmitt also belongs to this scientific circle, but the analysis quoted earlier
did not appear on the organisation’s website, therefore the article by Blumbergs,
Minárik, van der Meij and Lindström has already been published by the world
press as NATO’s position. Thus, special emphasis is placed on what Minárik said:
4
 Michael N. Schmitt – Liis Vihul: International Cyber Law Politicized: The UN GGE’s Failure
to Advance Cyber Norms.
 Just Security,
 30 June 2017.
5
 Michael N. Schmitt – Jeffrey Biller: The NotPetya Cyber Operation as a Case Study of Inter
-
national Law.
 EJIL:Talk!,
 11 June 2107.


========== PAGE 7 ==========
115
“If the operation is related to an international armed conflict, it is subject to the
legislation on armed conflict.” Previously, NATO CCD COE commentaries had
not visited the world press on such a delicate matter, so it could be perceived that
NotPetya weighed significantly more than any other previous case.
6
The States’ Answer
Countries were not prepared for such a serious violation of international norms.
The really big breakthrough came only in February 2018, when 7 countries, the
United States, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Lithuania, Estonia, Canada and
Australia, jointly condemned Russia for the NotPetya attack, which was officially
supported by New Zealand, Norway, Latvia, Sweden and Finland. Never before
have several countries used the means of attribution together, that is, they have
pointed out the attacker in unison. Attribution is always a political decision that
can be supported by technical or intelligence evidence, but without political
will, they are not worth much. Tobias Feakin, Australia’s Ambassador for Cyber
Affairs, summed up excellently why this joint stand was an important step and
what it means for the attackers:
“What we’re doing is maturing this approach in order that the consequences will be felt
further in the future. So another key part of deterrence is signalling to another country, to
provide clear, consistent, and credible messaging to adversaries that there will be reper
 -
cussions for the behaviour that they’re conducting.”
7
Depending on the attribution’s certainty, there are several tools in the hand of
nation states to give answer to a cyberattack. Moret and Pawlak give an example,
how individual countries or EU institutions, member states in the EU Council
or the EU in cooperation with international organisations can choose from the
following answers:
–
 statements and demarches
–
 international agreements
6
 Bernhards Blumbergs et al.: NotPetya and WannaCry Call for a Joint Response from Inter -
national Community.
 NATO CCD COE,
 2017.
7
 Stilgherrian: Blaming Russia for NotPetya was Coordinated Diplomatic Action.
ZDNet,
 11
April 2018.


========== PAGE 8 ==========
116
–
 capacity building
–
 strategic communication
–
 joint investigations
–
 statements by HR/VP
–
 EU demarches
–
 formal request for assistance
–
 Council conclusions
–
 political and cyber dialogues
–
 recalling diplomats
–
 sanctions
–
 solidarity clause
–
 countermeasures
–
 Mutual Defence Clause
–
 military response
8
At the time of NotPetya only the United States implemented unilateral cyber sanc
 -
tions. In 2015, President Barack Obama used this format against North Korea in
response to the attack against Sony Pictures. Therefore, other countries have not
had any tested and proven responses against devastating cyberattacks. Until 2017,
most countries officially treated the threats in cyberspace as an internal defence
question; however, they agreed that international norms and legislation are valid
in the cyberspace as well. Attribution, diplomatic or even military responses were
not part of the common diplomacy toolbox. Only the United States had enough
power to publicly attribute another country, generally speaking Russia, Iran and
North Korea in connection with cyberattacks. That is why NotPetya was a game
changer. The U.S. Government attributed the NotPetya attack to Russia with the
following statement from the Press Secretary of the White House:
“In June 2017, the Russian military launched the most destructive and costly cyber-attack
in history. The attack, dubbed “NotPetya,” quickly spread worldwide, causing billions of
dollars in damage across Europe, Asia, and the Americas. It was part of the Kremlin’s
ongoing effort to destabilize Ukraine and demonstrates ever more clearly Russia’s involve
 -
ment in the ongoing conflict. This was also a reckless and indiscriminate cyber ­attack that
will be met with international consequences.”
9
8
 Erica Moret – Patryk Pawlak: The EU Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox: Towards a Cyber Sanctions
Regime?
 EUISS,
 July 2017.
9
 The White House:
Statement from the Press Secretary.
 15 February 2018.


========== PAGE 9 ==========
117
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency of the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) together with the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) even created a separate investigation and attribution stream to the Rus
 -
sian cyberattacks. It is called Grizzly Steppe. Both agencies analyse the tactics,
techniques and procedures (TTPs as it is used in cybersecurity) of Russian state
sponsored actors. Codename Grizzly Steppe was chosen right after the alleged
intervention of Russian secret services in the 2016 Presidential Election. The
list of cyberattacks was later enhanced with NotPetya and the cyber activity of
the Russian Government targeting energy, other critical infrastructure sectors
and network infrastructure devices.
10
 DHS summarised such activities with
the following sentences:
“Russia’s civilian and military intelligence services engaged in aggressive and sophisti
 -
cated cyber-enabled operations targeting the U.S. government and its citizens. The U.S.
Government refers to this activity as GRIZZLY STEPPE. These cyber operations included
spearphishing campaigns targeting government organizations, critical infrastructure
entities, think tanks, universities, political organizations, and corporations, and theft of
information from these organizations. This stolen information was later publicly released
by third parties. In operations targeting other countries, including U.S. allies and partners,
Russian intelligence services (RIS) have undertaken damaging or disruptive cyber-at
 -
tacks, including on critical infrastructure—in some cases masquerading as third parties
or hiding behind false online personas designed to cause the victim to misattribute the
source of the attack.”
11
Such approach is not surprising from the United States. It uses a very straight
diplomatic language against its main global competitors and especially in cyber
cases, it always tries to clarify the boundaries of acceptable international norms.
Until the 2015 meeting of President Barack Obama and President Xi Jinping
when the two leaders agreed on major cybersecurity questions, U.S. officials
mainly remembered about the unacceptable behaviour of China. Later on, the
U.S. seemingly forgot China and turned to Russia. In 2020, the U.S. criticises
China again, following its general foreign policy.
A similar approach can be seen in other countries. Close U.S. allies like
the United Kingdom or Australia also had clear statements on NotPetya. On
10
 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency:
Grizzly Steppe – Russian Malicious Cyber
Activity.
 16 April 2018.
11
 Department of Homeland Security:
Executive Summary of Grizzly Steppe Findings from Home
 -
land Security Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Todd Breasseale.
 30 December 2016.


========== PAGE 10 ==========
118
15 February 2018, U.K. Foreign Office Minister Lord Ahmad attributed this
cyberattack to Russia highlighting that the U.K. and its allies will not tolerate
malicious cyber activities.
“The UK Government judges that the Russian Government, specifically the Russian mil
 -
itary, was responsible for the destructive NotPetya cyber-attack of June 2017. The attack
showed a continued disregard for Ukrainian sovereignty. Its reckless release disrupted
organisations across Europe costing hundreds of millions of pounds. The Kremlin has
positioned Russia in direct opposition to the West yet it doesn’t have to be that way. We call
upon Russia to be the responsible member of the international community it claims to be
rather then secretly trying to undermine it. The United Kingdom is identifying, pursuing
and responding to malicious cyber activity regardless of where it originates, imposing costs
on those who would seek to do us harm. We are committed to strengthening coordinated
international efforts to uphold a free, open, peaceful and secure cyberspace.”
12
The United Kingdom, part of the Five Eyes countries and closest ally of the
U.S. is also very straight with Russia; unsurprisingly, Russia has many active
operations on the island.
On the next day, 16 February 2018, Australian Minister for Law Enforcement
and Cyber Security, Angus Taylor released the following statement:
“Australian Government attribution of the ‘NotPetya’ cyber incident to Russia. The Austral
 -
ian Government has joined the governments of the United States and the United Kingdom
in condemning Russia’s use of the ‘NotPetya’ malware to attack critical infrastructure
and businesses in June 2017. Based on advice from Australian intelligence agencies, and
through consultation with the United States and United Kingdom, the Australian Gov
 -
ernment has judged that Russian state sponsored actors were responsible for the incident.
Computers were infected by a sophisticated piece of malware – or malicious software – that
masqueraded as ransomware. ‘NotPetya’ interrupted the normal operation of banking,
power, airports and metro services in Ukraine. While the brunt of the impact was felt in
Ukraine, the malware spread globally, affecting a number of major international businesses
causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage. The Australian Government condemns
Russia’s behaviour, which posed grave risks to the global economy, to government oper
 -
ations and services, to businesses activity and the safety and welfare of individuals. The
Australian Government is further strengthening its international partnerships through
an International Cyber Engagement Strategy to deter and respond to the malevolent use
of cyberspace. The Government is committed to ensuring the Australian public sector,
businesses and the community are prepared for evolving cyber threats.”
13
12
 Foreign and Commonwealth Office:
Foreign Office Minister Condemns Russia for NotPetya
Attacks.
 15 February 2018.
13
 Parliament of Australia:
Australian Government Attribution of the ‘NotPetya’ Cyber Incident
to Russia.
 16 February 2016.


========== PAGE 11 ==========
119
Australia is more exposed to Chinese cyberattacks, therefore it rarely deals with
Russian originated attacks. We can treat this remark as a polite gesture for the
United States.
Estonian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sven Mikser reflects to the U.K. Gov
 -
ernment in his press release:
“The NotPetya cyber ­attack which targeted Ukraine’s financial, energy and government
sectors and undermined the sectors’ resilience, demonstrated disrespect for Ukrainian
sovereignty and caused significant economic losses in other countries too. It is very impor
 -
tant for Estonia to maintain an open, stable and secure cyber space and for that, countries
have to act responsibly and follow the rules of international cooperation and the norms of
international law that apply in cyber space just like everywhere else.”
14
Estonia is the closest ally of the United States in the Baltic region and has the
closest ties towards the U.S. in cybersecurity. They were also the first country
that suffered a devastating cyberattack from Russia. Estonians are also pioneer
 -
ing in cyber diplomacy. It is not surprising that that full support was given for
the attribution.
As we can see, those countries who officially attributed the cyberattack to
Russia, draw up their views by the foreign ministers or ministers responsible for
cybersecurity. Supporting nations of this diplomatic step also emphasised the role
of Russia, but the announcements were made by lower ranked government offi
 -
cials. For example, in New Zealand, Director-General of the Government Com
 -
munications Security Bureau (GCSB) Andrew Hampton released the statement.
“While NotPetya masqueraded as a criminal ransomware campaign, its real purpose
was to damage and disrupt systems […]. Its primary targets were Ukrainian financial,
energy and government sectors. However, NotPetya’s indiscriminate design caused it
to spread around the world affecting these sectors world ­wide. While there were no
reports of NotPetya having a direct impact in New Zealand, it caused disruption to some
organisations while they updated systems to protect themselves from it. This reinforces
that New Zealand is not immune from this type of threat. In a globally connected world
our relative geographic isolation offers no protection from cyber threats. We support the
actions of our cyber security partners in calling out this sort of reckless and malicious
cyber activity.”
15
14
 Republic of Estonia:
Foreign Minister Mikser Condemns Russia for NotPetya Attacks against
Ukraine.
 15 February 2018.
15
 Government Communications Security Bureau:
New Zealand Joins International Condemnation
of NotPetya Cyber-attack.
 16 February 2018.


========== PAGE 12 ==========
120
New Zealand, like Australia is far from Russia and has much more problems in the
cyberspace with China. As member of the Five Eyes countries, it supported the attribu
 -
tion, but we can assume that the government has not given high priority for this issue.
In case of Latvia, the public reaction was a short message on Twitter from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs: “#Latvia is deeply concerned about the findings of
UK & US attribution of #NotPetya #Cyber_attacks and stands for responsible
state behaviour in cyberspace.” In case of a country with 27% of native Russians,
even a tweet can be a strong support towards its NATO allies.
Deterrence in Cyberspace
NotPetya was the red line for Western countries that invoked not only diplo
 -
matic reactions as it was mentioned in the previous section, but after 2018, some
countries, especially the United States have publicly introduced some retaliatory
actions against Russia. This is not surprising as according to the traditional deter
 -
rence theory, three elements should be present to stop a rogue activity: attribution,
credible signalling and deterrence strategies. Taddeo explains that as follows:
“A believes that B is planning to attack it. In order to avoid the attack, A makes an explicit
commitment to take action against B, should B decide to attack. A’s commitment should
be such that B is convinced that any action against A will fail, because A has the capacity
either to resist or punish B, and to outweigh any prospective gains for B. B’s conviction
hinges on A’s signalling and credibility to act as it threatens. According to this model, we
find here the three core elements of deterrence theory: the identification of the opponent
(attribution); defence and retaliation as types of deterrence strategies; and the capability
of the defender to signal credible threats.”
16
In that sense, attribution is only the first step. However, responsible attribution is not
as easy as it seems to be, that is why only the United States, the only superpower
used this tool before NotPetya. In the cyberspace, attribution needs both convincing
technical evidence and reliable intelligence sources. Due to the anonym and global
nature of the Internet, collection of hard evidence from computers and networks is
struggling. What can be seen on the defenders’ side is only a few technical informa
 -
tion or indicators of compromise (IoC). They are usually files and operating system
16
 Mariarosaria Taddeo: The Limits of Deterrence Theory in Cyberspace.
Philosophy and Tech
 -
nology,
 31, no. 3 (2018). 339–355.


========== PAGE 13 ==========
121
activities or source/destination IP addresses. Security researchers should prove who
are behind NotPetya by finding evidence in the following infection process:
–
 dropped files
–
 process hashes and process privilege checks
–
 credential theft
–
 token impersonation
–
 malware propagation
•
 network node enumeration
•
 SMB copy and remote execution
•
 SMBv1 exploitation via EternalBlue
–
 UNC write malware to admin$ on remote target
–
 remote execution of the malware
•
 MBR ransomware
•
 physical drive manipulation
•
 MFT encryption
–
 file encryption
–
 system shutdown
–
 anti-forensics
17
In case of NotPetya, the EternalBlue vulnerability, used for malware propagation was
originated from the National Security Agency in the United States. For credential
theft, the attackers used Mimikatz, originally created as a proof of concept by French
security researcher Benjamin Delpy in 2011. There was not a complex network infra
 -
structure with millions of previously infected computers in the botnet, as the attack
was targeted, originated from the MEDoc update server and it is still not known
who and how has hacked this server. In such cases, researchers can only rely on the
coding style of the malware. Source codes are similar to fingerprints. A programmer
usually has his own coding style, a group of programmers are usually using the same
framework to improve their software. Cybercriminals are usually lazy enough to
make only minor changes, “feature releases” in different campaigns. But that is not
true in case of sophisticated, state sponsored targeted attacks. The name NotPetya
was chosen as for first sight, it was similar to Petya ransomware, although it is now
obvious, that there is no connection between the two malwares. It is possible that
the original source code of NotPetya was stolen or bought from the original author
17
 Karan Sood – Shaun Hurley: NotPetya Technical Analysis – A Triple Threat: File Encryption,
MFT Encryption, Credential Theft.
 Crowdstrike,
 29 June 2017.


========== PAGE 14 ==========
122
who was convicted by a regional court in Nikopol in the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast of
Ukraine to one year in prison in 2018 after pleading guilty to having spread a version
of Petya online. He is an unnamed Ukrainian citizen.
NotPetya’s traces were well-hidden from the technical perspective. Neither
governmental, nor industry sources have uncovered any “smoking guns” that
underpins the role of Russia in this cyberattack. However, many countries attrib
 -
uted them with high confidence. We can assume that the United States and maybe
other countries had indisputable intelligence information. As Carr wrote:
“The most likely adversary responsible for a covert attack against those critical systems
is an extremist group (religious, political, or anarchist), and the best way to learn which of
those groups may have been responsible post-attack is to already have in place a long-term
counter ­intelligence campaign of infiltration and the development of trusted contacts with
access. This cannot be done virtually or from behind a computer. Rather, those intelligence
agencies that have yet to devote the bulk of their budget to signals capabilities may be best
positioned to tackle the problem of attribution. They understand the need to continue to
fund and even expand human intelligence – this is still vital, despite the fact that we are
living in the age of Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.”
18
The assumption about the U.S. and allies’ capabilities on cyber intelligence
against Russia can be confirmed with some examples after NotPetya. We can
count such leaked information and direct responses as credible signalling accord
 -
ing to the deterrence theory. As Taddeo defines:
“Signaling can be either general or tailored. General signaling conveys a message about the
overall deterrence strategy to the rest of the international arena, through open statements
released by a state conveying information about its approaches, commitments, and capabil
 -
ities. […] Tailored signalling—the conveying of a threat to a specific offender indicating the
possible targets of retaliation—is more problematic than general signalling and constitutes a
significant obstacle to delivering effective deterrence strategies in cyberspace. This kind of
signalling is effective if attribution is certain. If the defender has not identified the offender
correctly, tailored signalling can be counterproductive given it may be directed to the wrong
actor. Tailored signalling also requires a careful finetuning in order not to expose the defend
 -
er’s capabilities and assets, especially when the defender is considering retaliation in-kind.
The risks are multiple and range from exposing knowledge about the opponent’s cyber assets,
which would imply that the defender has also run cyber operations (sabotage or espionage)
against the opponent, to revealing the defender’s assets and strategies, which may expose
and therefore render futile its cyber capabilities, such as zero-day exploits (for example).”
19
18
 Jeffrey Carr: Responsible Attribution: A Prerequisite for Accountability.
NATO CCD COE,
 2014.
19
 Taddeo (2018): op. cit. 352.


========== PAGE 15 ==========
123
First of all, on 11 June 2018, the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign
Assets Control designated five Russian entities and three Russian individuals under
Executive Order (E.O.) 13694,
 Blocking the Property of Certain Persons Engaging
in Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled Activities.
 All property and interests in
property of the designated persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and
U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.
20
Some notable cyberattacks can also show how Western countries retaliated
Russian cyber (and other military) activities by flashing their capabilities:
–
 Panama Papers: On 1 April 2016, Mossack Fonseca, Panamanian law
firm and corporate service provider notified its customers that millions
of digital documents were stolen after a targeted cyberattack. These doc
 -
uments consisted of detailed information about the tax avoidance and
money laundry of many notable persons. The hack was committed by an
unknown hacker, “John Doe”, who said that he had never worked for any
intelligence agency. Whether it is true or not, the
 Süddeutsche Zeitung
published an interview with Alexey Navalny, head of the Moscow-based
NGO Anti-Corruption Foundation on the connection of President Putin
and other leading figures with the Panama Papers.
–
 Dutch intelligence against Cozy Bear: In January 2018, Dutch news
sources published a story on how their domestic intelligence service, AIVD
accessed the IT system of the Cozy Bear hacker group, that is believed to
be associated with Russian intelligence. This group is suspected with many
notable cyberattacks, such as attacks during the 2016 Presidential Election.
–
 Bellingcat and Skripal Poisoners: In 2018 and 2019, Bellingcat, the online
investigative journal has published a series of articles about the poisoners
of Sergei Skripal and his daughter, who died in the United Kingdom.
Based on open source intelligence, they could identify the poisoners and
track back their lives even until high school. Although such investigative
journalism is highly appreciated, it can be assumed that some kind of
official intelligence support was provided by Western countries.
–
 U.S. cyberattacks on Russian Power Grid: In response to the cyberattacks
against its critical infrastructures, the U.S. has conducted a similar attack
and shared this information with the press in June 2019. As President
Trump’s national security adviser, John R. Bolton said, the United States
20
 U.S. Department of Treasury:
Treasury Sanctions Russian Federal Security Service Enablers.
11 June 2018.


========== PAGE 16 ==========
124
was now taking a broader view of potential digital targets as part of an
effort “to say to Russia, or anybody else that’s engaged in cyberoperations
against us, ‘You will pay a price’.”
Conclusion
Traditional deterrence theory proposes two potential deterrence strategies:
deterrence by defence and by retaliation. In the cyberspace, believing solely in
deterrence by defence is not a real option. Simply, because the already developed
tools, techniques and procedures set are enormous, and attackers can easily create
a previously non-existing attack path. From their point of view, one weak link in
the defence chain is enough for success. Therefore, countries should rely more
on defence by retaliation, not forgetting to improve their defence capabilities as
well. We can see such efforts all over the world.
The EU Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox is an example for that. As the press release
of the Council of the EU states:
“On 17 May 2019, the Council established a framework which allows the EU to impose
targeted restrictive measures to deter and respond to cyber-attacks which constitute an
external threat to the EU or its member states, including cyber-attacks against third States
or international organizations where restricted measures are considered necessary to
achieve the objectives of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).”
21
The lack of EU reaction to NotPetya is a symptom why this Toolbox is neces -
sary. As the relation of the EU members to Russia is complicated, without
such common understanding, it is difficult to find a harmonised way for joint
sanctions. But states do not forget and forgive. After 5 years of a cyberattack
against the German Parliament, Chancellor Angela Merkel seeks EU sanctions
as they have hard evidence against Russian actors. This will be the first test of
the Toolbox where EU members can prove their willingness for a coordinated
response.
22
“Cyber-attacks falling within the scope of this new sanction’s regime are those which have
significant impact and which:
21
 Council of the EU:
Cyber-attacks: Council Is Now Able to Impose Sanctions.
 17 May 2019.
22
 Catherine Stupp: Germany Seeks EU Sanctions for 2015 Cyberattack on Its Parliament.
The
Wall Street Journal,
 11 June 2020.


========== PAGE 17 ==========
125
– originate or are carried out from outside the EU or
– use infrastructure outside the EU or
– are carried out by persons or entities established or operating outside the EU or
– are carried out with the support of person or entities operating outside the EU
Attempted cyber ­attacks with a potentially significant effect are also covered by this sanc
-
tion’s regime. […] Restrictive measures include a ban on persons travelling to the EU, and
an asset freeze on persons and entities. In addition, EU persons and entities are forbidden
from making funds available to those listed.”
23
We can see that the U.S. Government is actively using deterrence by retaliation
strategy. Currently, it seems to be successful, as since 2017 there was not any
major cyberattack, attributed to Russia. However, most of the actions on that
field are covert and the public audience will get information decades later. Jason
Healey, one the best scholars in this topic and Neil Jenkins tried to measure
the success of deterrence from the U.S. perspective. Their article ends with the
following thoughts:
“We can’t assess what we don’t try to measure. Together, the frameworks in this paper
can act as a check on whether these new, riskier U.S. cyber policies and operations are
succeeding in suppressing incoming attacks, or inciting them. […] the U.S. Government
cannot easily even know all its own operations against adversaries: some will be covert
actions, others espionage, while others are “traditional military operations.” Each is held
in a separate compartment and few individuals have the full picture.”
24
Whatever will happen, the alleged attackers’ response will be the same as what
we heard from Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov in February 2018, right after
the attribution of many countries: “We categorically reject such accusations. We
consider them unsubstantiated and groundless. This is nothing but a continuation
of a Russophobic campaign that is not based on any evidence.”
25
NotPetya was nor the first, neither the last cyberattack in history. Countries
should develop acceptable norms and behaviour in cyberspace, but they are
getting farther and farther from a consensus. As both Russia and China can be
more independent from the U.S. governed global Internet, as members of the
23
 Council of the EU (2019): op. cit.
24
 Jason Healey – Neil Jenkins: Rough-and-Ready: A Policy Framework to Determine if Cyber
Deterrence is Working or Failing. In Tomáš Minárik – Siim Alatalu – Stefano Biondi – Massimiliano
Signoretti – Ihsan Tolga – Gábor Visky (eds.):
 11th International Conference on Cyber Conflict:
Silent Battle.
 Tallinn: NATO CCD COE Publications, 2019. 123–142.
25
 AFP: Kremlin ‘Categorically’ Denies Russia behind NotPetya Cyber-attack.
France 24,
 15
February 2018.


========== PAGE 18 ==========
126
United Nations Security Council, they are able, and they are willing to influence
where the cyberspace is turning. As of 2020, we can see a clear intention from
the Western countries to sustain the current situation and remarkable steps from
Russia and China towards changing it. Diplomats of the 2020s should notice that
what is happening today will have a fundamental effect for the next five decades.
References
AFP: Kremlin ‘Categorically’ Denies Russia behind NotPetya Cyber-attack.
 France 24,
 15 Feb
 -
ruary 2018. Online:
 www.france24.com/en/20180215 ­kremlin ­categorically ­denies ­russia ­be
-
hind-notpetya-cyber-attack
Blumbergs, Bernhards – Tomáš Minárik – Kris Van Der Meij – Lauri Lindström: NotPetya and
WannaCry Call for a Joint Response from International Community.
 NATO CCD COE,
2017. Online:
 https://ccdcoe.org/news/2017/notpetya ­and ­wannacry ­call ­for ­a­joint ­re
-
sponse ­from ­international ­community/
Carr, Jeffrey: Responsible Attribution: A Prerequisite for Accountability.
 NATO CCD COE,
 2014.
Online:
 https://ccdcoe.org/uploads/2018/10/Tallinn ­Paper ­No ­6­Carr.pdf
Council of the EU:
 Cyber-attacks: Council Is Now Able to Impose Sanctions.
 17 May 2019. Online:
www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press ­releases/2019/05/17/cyber ­attacks ­council ­is­now ­
able ­to­impose ­sanctions/
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency:
 Grizzly Steppe – Russian Malicious Cyber
Activity.
 16 April 2018. Online:
 www.us ­cert.gov/GRIZZLY ­STEPPE ­Russian ­Malicious ­Cy
-
ber-Activity
Department of Homeland Security:
 Executive Summary of Grizzly Steppe Findings from Homeland
Security Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Todd Breasseale.
 30 December 2016. Online:
www.dhs.gov/news/2016/12/30/executive ­summary ­grizzly ­steppe ­findings­ homeland ­secu
-
rity-assistant-secretary
Foreign and Commonwealth Office:
 Foreign Office Minister Condemns Russia for NotPetya
Attacks.
 15 February 2018. Online:
 www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign ­office ­minister ­con
-
demns-russia-for-notpetya-attacks
Government Communications Security Bureau:
 New Zealand Joins International Condemna
 -
tion of NotPetya Cyber-attack.
 16 February 2018. Online:
 www.gcsb.govt.nz/news/new ­zea
-
land ­joins ­international ­condemnation ­of­notpetya ­cyber ­attack/
Greenberg, Andy: Petya Ransomware Epidemic May Be Spillover From Cyberwar.
 Wired,
 28 June
2017. Online:
 www.wired.com/story/petya ­ransomware ­ukraine/
Healey, Jason – Neil Jenkins: Rough-and-Ready: A Policy Framework to Determine if Cyber Deter
 -
rence is Working or Failing. In Tomáš Minárik – Siim Alatalu – Stefano Biondi – Massimiliano
Signoretti – Ihsan Tolga – Gábor Visky (eds.):
 11th International Conference on Cyber Conflict:
Silent Battle.
 Tallinn: NATO CCD COE Publications, 2019. 123–142.
Maersk Press Room:
 A. P. Moller – Maersk Improves Underlying Profit and Grows Rev
 -
enue in First Half of the Year.
 16 August 2017. Online:
 www.maersk.com/press/


========== PAGE 19 ==========
127
press ­release ­archive/20170816 ­a­p­moller ­maersk ­improves ­underlying ­profit ­and ­grows ­
revenue ­in­first ­half­ of­ the ­year
Maynor, David – Aleksandar Nikolic – Matt Olney – Yves Younan: The MeDoc Connection.
Talos Intelligence,
 05 July 2017. Online:
 https://blog.talosintelligence.com/2017/07/the ­me
-
doc-connection.html
Moret, Erica – Patryk Pawlak: The EU Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox: Towards a Cyber Sanctions
Regime?
 EUISS,
 July 2017. Online:
 www.iss.europa.eu/sites/default/files/EUISSFiles/Brief%20
24%20Cyber%20sanctions.pdf
Parliament of Australia:
 Australian Government Attribution of the ‘NotPetya’ Cyber Incident to
Russia.
 16 February 2018. Online:
 https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.
w3p;query=Id%3A%22media%2Fpressrel%2F5793917%22
Republic of Estonia:
 Foreign Minister Mikser Condemns Russia for NotPetya Attacks against
Ukraine.
 15 February 2018. Online:
 https://vm.ee/en/news/foreign ­minister ­mikser ­con
-
demns-russia-notpetya-attacks-against-ukraine
Schmitt, Michael N. – Jeffrey Biller: The NotPetya Cyber Operation as a Case Study of Interna
 -
tional Law.
 EJIL:Talk!,
 11 June 2107. Online:
 www.ejiltalk.org/the ­notpetya ­cyber ­opera
-
tion ­as­a­case ­study ­of­international ­law/
Schmitt, Michael N. – Liis Vihul: International Cyber Law Politicized: The UN GGE’s Failure
to Advance Cyber Norms.
 Just Security,
 30 June 2017. Online:
 www.justsecurity.org/42768/
international ­cyber ­law ­politicized ­gges ­failure ­advance ­cyber ­norms/
Sood, Karan – Shaun Hurley: NotPetya Technical Analysis – A Triple Threat: File Encryption,
MFT Encryption, Credential Theft.
 Crowdstrike,
 29 June 2017. Online:
 www.crowdstrike.
com/blog/petrwrap ­ransomware ­technical ­analysis ­triple ­threat ­file ­encryption ­mft ­encryp
-
tion ­credential ­theft/
Stilgherrian: Blaming Russia for NotPetya was Coordinated Diplomatic Action.
 ZDNet,
 11 April
2018. Online:
 www.zdnet.com/article/blaming ­russia ­for ­notpetya ­was ­coordinated ­diplo
-
matic ­action/
Stupp, Catherine: Germany Seeks EU Sanctions for 2015 Cyberattack on Its Parliament.
 The Wall
Street Journal,
 11 June 2020. Online:
 www.wsj.com/articles/germany ­seeks­ eu­sanctions­ for ­
2015-cyberattack-on-its-parliament-11591867801
Taddeo, Mariarosaria: The Limits of Deterrence Theory in Cyberspace.
 Philosophy and Technology,
31, no. 3 (2018). 339–355. Online:
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347­ 017­ 0290 ­2
The White House:
 Statement from the Press Secretary.
 15 February 2018. Online:
 https://trump
 -
whitehouse.archives.gov/briefings ­statements/statement ­press ­secretary ­25/
U.S. Department of Treasury:
 Treasury Sanctions Russian Federal Security Service Enablers.
 11
June 2018. Online:
 https://home.treasury.gov/news/press ­releases/sm0410
